okay everybody thank you for joining
this is the town of Andover uh Board of
Finance special budget meeting on
Wednesday March 19th
2025 so uh we will go ahead and call the
meeting to order and recite the Pledge
of Allegiance I pledge allegiance to
flag United States of America repic to
the
repic stand
one godible
jce okay thank you um next uh order of
business is uh public
speak I think uh doesn't look like we
have any external members of the public
we have Chris and
that's she just here for support I
assume but you're welcome to contribute
if you care
to okay well we'll go ahead and begin in
our uh budget Workshop so the um as I
had said again I apologize for the
problems last uh week don't know what
happened we did the same thing today and
it did not happen same computer
everything so I'm not sure what's going
on uh but Eric and I did a couple Drive
ups and we logged in so we're all uh
we're all here now um so lesson learned
try it beforehand and make sure we're
good uh but we'll go ahead and get
started um as I had mentioned kind of in
some of my emails Following last
week's non meeting um I think what we
need to do today is really get down into
the nitty-gritty with the budget go
through line by line Department by
Department uh see where we have concerns
anybody has concerns on any particular
line items should raise them and then
we'll uh try to move through and and
make any adjustments uh we see fit so
I'm going to go ahead and share we did
have an updated budget file today
probably most of you hadn't had a chance
downloaded review it's just like four
hours ago or so oh yeah thank you yeah I
did see that before we get started could
we ask Eric Mark like what areas were
updated I wonder we should probably and
Chris is here too maybe we can choose a
new color like magenta or something if
something get I'm in it quite often and
I don't know how we'd tell what part got
updated just a thought that's actually a
very good idea
Joanne a lot of time in it it's I'm like
oh I wonder what they did I don't know
if they you know so maybe we could pick
a color
tonight that thanks yeah I think it
would be helpful yep not a problem so at
the the last meeting let's start on the
the income side um so if you go up
Scroll up to around line 16
and while Eric's scrolling Mark can I
ask one more procedural
question yep good thank you you know so
many thoughts came up and I know we
didn't have Eric last time and different
things and with the new Charter revision
and the time crunch I know I'm feeling
like the crunch now because of all of
this but we'll we'll get there so quick
question is I know this is a special
meeting we're not allowed to add
anything to this thing this um agenda
sorry
but we under budget discussion is pretty
wide open right yeah I would say so as
long of the budget you know we're
developing sounds good all right I'll
I'll shush now and listen thank you Mark
I think you're actually sharing the
wrong one the latest one in that file y
you're right should be 3.1
19.25 yeah I had them both open as uh
Joan mentioned we were I think I was uh
and actually put that exact file name in
my uh email I had it both open to just
do a quick
compare give me just a sec here
trying and get rid of this tab there we
go
okay all right and again if you can go
to 16 under Municipal
stabilization uh the reason why put that
in yellow is that like all governmental
revenues the state does not have a
budget yet so all of these are best
guesses um it sounds like they're
probably be enough push back from the
little towns um that they will probably
hold the towns harmless on ECF funding
and restore the
$89,000 but we have no idea when they're
even the governor is still resisting
doing that so we have no idea when and
if the legislature and the governor will
come to an agreement on that um the
municipal stabilization fund that's kind
of a weird one because it's money given
to the
town supposedly money back from
taxation but if the town goes over
2.5% increase in the total budget
increase or
alternatively uh or it's higher than the
rate of inflation which the state is
saying is three .1% inflation right now
we're just under that number so we get
the full we'll be estimated to get the
full amount but we only have about
0.1 um of percent of budget increase
before that number gets cut in half um
and we lose 21,000 in Revenue so I just
wanted to bring that to your attention
right now we're okay but if there are
increases we need to be worrying about
that because we potentially will lose
you know roughly 21,000 in
Revenue sorry over all budget okay hang
on I'm just gonna
window Liz while he stepped oh okay yeah
I was GNA say so our overall budget
cannot be more than what percent can't
be greater than what percent it's
basically
3.1% increase yeah yeah it's not the
mill
increase it's the total budget
expenditure okay or total by taxation
basically you can look at it that
way Eric I was gonna have we had this
line in here before I I mean is it sorry
I'm looking at it my eyes yes I'm
assuming we did because you we go
through this every year and then it gets
funded so this yeah this would kind of
be an this is a safeguard for that right
that's what you're saying this amount of
money no it's it's
really that Municipal stabilization fund
is is given to the towns automatically
that's something that's been negotiated
for many years as part of the budget
process um it's just in the last couple
of years they've put this uh you
know along with it saying that oh if
your budget goes up more than a certain
amount of money we're going to give you
less money which means your budget will
go up even more so it's one of those
kind of really stupid things but I just
wanted you to be aware of that but it
sounds like they're protecting towns too
to try to keep spending reasonable if
they give them a 3% window all right
thank you
yep okay
so if we could let's go ahead and I'd
like to start from the top and just I I
most of this is going to be what it's
going to be um now we have the proposed
um current year taxes derived from the
mill rate calculation sheet Eric did we
do we we have not revised the grand list
for the most recent Board of selectman
decision to change the pr rate Factor on
the motor vehicle calculation is that
correct no we haven't um
so if you looked at the the mill rate
calculation sheet um the estimated mill
rate
still uh is based off an 85% initial
assessment for Motor Vehicles not a
90% we've asked the company that helps
us produce the grand list to give us the
updated values for 90% as soon as we
have it we'll plug it in um looking at
what other towns have done that seems
like it's going to take about
1% away from the mill rate
increase
roughly because it's going to increase
the taxable Grand list um you know right
now the the taxable Grand list is going
down 2% once that change is in place it
should be going down no more than 1% so
that will have about a 1% positive
increase on the percent mill rate
increase if that makes sense
yeah y okay does every Everybody
understand that that they they had
changed the way that uh you could um
evaluate the value of Motor Vehicles
which you know reduced the grand list
for most towns and then they gave some
relief that um you could use an
alternate calculation of the uh I guess
depreciation of the value of the vehicle
for all intents and purposes so that'll
help bring the grand list back into
align with what it's been previously and
the board of Selectmen voted to make
that change uh but it requires a lot of
recalculation of the grand list so we
don't have that data in here
yet okay any questions on that so we're
saying yeah we'll go it will yeah it's
going to be they're able to tax the
automobiles or the motor vehicles and
things of that nature at the higher rate
right and then high right
whereas we would had to it up on the
resal side or you know for that kind of
thing I'm thinking yeah the overall mill
rate would go up so doesn't really
change the tax picture it just changes
where it's allocated the mill rate is uh
is and last question on that because
Eric was telling us the spots that got
updated so this page has been updated up
to what the changes you made today Eric
so far
or correct except I will say that
the change in the health
care did not for some reason the formula
got wiped out again um so it's not
propagating Chris changed it in the main
tab which shows the health care but it's
not propagating up to the actual line
item so okay we're gonna have to correct
that tomorrow it does all total it's
it's just well if you think about it
it's 1% of the healthcare care budget so
it's about
$1900
difference that's what it'll come to
yeah I was trying to do some backwards
math and I kept checking to see if it
had been
recalculated um but it will go from
increasing you know whatever you paid
this year the final bill from you know
the 8% thing that you put everywhere
back to the 7% that got voted in right I
I knew that between so a lot of
adjustments that had to be made we
wouldn't have the most update thing but
yeah but I get it and we still have a
few more meetings to go so okay you only
a couple I know I know but it's hard to
like we lost last week understandably
people were volunteers that spend a lot
of time on this so when we didn't have a
lot of the stuff right you know there
was a mistake and then Eric's away he
deserves vacation and then if we don't
have that it's hard to really think in
my head so we do the best we can so you
might need all those meetings and there
and there are some movie targets right
so things sure right so speaking of
moving targets if you look at the sheet
you're looking at now if you look down
at the ram entry for uh
2526 you'll notice that is increased
slightly over what you were presented
the last time so I did get an updated
and let's be honest the board of the Ram
Board of Ed has not finalized their
budget so I doubt this will be the the
last change that we get in their budget
their budget did increase for us by
around
$2,000 um so that's updated in this
document um and I think they said out
loud Eric that they still have to factor
in tuition the final cost won't be
determined until they allow bill I think
had asked about the Colombia students
that you know are going to be joining
too that might take off a little so like
you yeah yeah they right and that that's
not something I have I just update it
when they give me the information um
back on the main budget tab I did per
year request put that if you scroll down
a little bit uh scroll down under Ram
expenses I just put you know this is the
date this is the levy this is how much
we're getting for credit this is how
much in the budget this is how much in
the CIP budget so you know what's going
into that number that 4 million 135
number thank you yeah that's helpful y
yep and then subsequent to that the only
other thing I really have in terms of
changes that I would like to discuss
with the board of Finance um because at
this point you know the r R
number that I can make because that's
determined by them not by me everything
else at this point you know you guys
have to agree to it before it goes in
the budget so if you scroll down
to uh the town keep going down and then
we can go back line by line um scroll
down a little bit more hold on stop yep
down just a little bit
more okay where it says computer tech
support um so we use the town of South
Windsor for our it support um we've had
a three-year contract we're coming up
July 1 is the end of our three-year
contract and we've been negotiating a
new contract um as we've done it one of
the problems we ran into is South Winder
has not been charging us um the overhead
for FICA and a few other things on their
personnel time and they when they went
through their audit process their
auditor pointed out that uh apparently
that they're not charging the towns uh
for their employees time so they have
requested an
increase um to around
$177,000 for that line item now I think
that's probably somewhat
negotiable um and frankly I just got
this today so I told uh their Chief
Information officer I would discuss it
with the board of Finance um you know
and get back to him because he's not our
employee right I mean is it a contract
we just have a contract with him for a
service yes that's absolutely it seems
like it's a again just again just
knowing employee things and whatever we
talk about just seems odd the reason why
you know so covering their cost is what
they're doing Joan oh I get it very much
but they should have had that figured
out how many years have we had them that
they're just bringing this up now Eric
uh three so uh they've been eating that
for the last three years and never
really realized it and it's not just
with our town um because they cover four
other towns too yeah oh no I get it
though I get why it just yeah yeah so
that's a portion of it we're
also um I've had some issues
with uh some of the ways the
relationship has been been between us
and them um and I've made a I've asked
them to make some significant changes in
how they provide us service and that
goes into a portion of this cost also
hey Eric yep it's a tiny small thing
maybe I just don't understand it but I'm
looking at the next line down it says
there's a $500 change but I look at
4,250 versus $4,000 it sounds like a
$250 change am I just not missing
something yeah because you're only
missing if Mark if you scrolled down
over you see the number this is the
estimated cost versus the original
budget sorry thank
you that's helpful actually seeing all
of that yeah yeah that's just in because
those are the lines were technically
required to be showing for the uh the
charter yeah that's why it reads this
way I recognize it gets a little
confusing and and I I hate to be a a
pick um Can the columns a b and c it
doesn't look like they're used can they
be deleted or shrunk so that we see more
of the notes on the right side or is
that just something we can't
do um let me I I think we can probably
hide them yeah lose some we're going to
lose some Header information but it
probably isn't really a value to us so
and last week or the week before in one
of the meetings we kind of made the font
a little bigger is there any way to make
this bigger for us now I'm
just that's why I'm on my camera off so
I can get but then we lose the data to
the right Joanne yeah okay no worries
I'll just me I like it bigger too my
eyes are we all like we're all in the
same boat here well most of us how was
that is that a reasonable compromise yes
it is that looks good it looks a lot
better thank you and then I so the upot
is that they they made a proposal to
increase their annual cost to about
17K corre and that's going to
negotiation between you and them and and
the board of Select M have to approve
that
contract uh yeah eventually when we get
to the actual contract the board
Selectmen would approve it but it's we
need to budget for it now if we're going
to consider that okay
um okay can I just ask
um is that the only tech support in the
budget or is there are there other no
I'm not remembering um if there are
other there's probably other computer
lines in the budget there are computer
lines but this is the only
actual um like Tech Support Tech Support
um and this covers Town Hall Community
Center and public works whenever they
need tech support so those are the the
three entities this covers mostly this
covers all the stuff required with
maintaining a server doing the correct
backups um interfacing getting the
firewalls set set up and functioning all
that stuff um and then daytoday you know
updating computers dealing with problems
that we have in the
office okay do they come out to the
office or or is it all through the phone
through no so they are on site one full
day every month and one half day every
month so it's not a ton of hours and
then they're on on for emergency support
um the other really good thing about and
kind of South Windsor was chosen in the
first place is there a big enough town
you have not only the tech that comes
out and does day-to-day stuff but you
have somebody that's a server specialist
that can deal with much more extensive
networking questions um you know and you
have somebody that's a a Cisco or a uh
an information security guy so you have
kind of the whole chain of command of a
big company to tap when you have
something other than hey my monitor
won't come on questions so gotcha thank
you okay any other questions on this
line
item not that line item something in the
town office building though okay well
how about if we go back up if we could
then and just okay think we gotta we got
a grind through Section by section right
oh perfect yep yep okay so Eric was just
uh responding to the request reest
identify the major changes so yeah I
have one procedure question for Eric too
Eric did we ever have a meeting this
year where at the end of the year we
went over transfers like Cheryl comes
you know I know that the transfer
language in the um
Charter had changed you know within
Department you don't need to bring them
for approval but did we ever have one of
those meetings where you had to transfer
like money around so that we were aware
because that helps us when it comes to
this yeah we did have that it just it
was a lot less than in previous years
because per the auditor now we don't
have to square up between uh departments
dep we only have to deal with interde
Department transfers when a whole
department is over so if I look back I
could see where there might have been a
big transfer or something or maybe we
just didn't have any this year yeah I
think that would have been June or
August there was not a whole lot
yeah I mean I have a good I just don't
recall that having Cheryl presentant and
going but sorry I know I'm off track but
it's budget related thank
you okay so if we could let's just take
a look at the revenue so we already
talked I mean the current year taxes is
calculated from the mill rate mill rate
tab so we'll take a look at that at the
end um there's a prior tax budget
proposed budget so you're you're
estimating $200,000 in Prior tax
collection that's based on kind of the
last 12 months of uh of reporting uh
where we've gotten so that we've done a
little better than expected or last 12
months um leans about six grand interest
taxes that's based on the stiff account
uh again based on the Run rate for the
last 12 months as you can see in the
comments column uh Telecom personal
property tax you've got 5K that says
need to revisit Eric any update on that
yeah we honestly neither Cheryl nor I
can really figure out we know we get the
money but we don't really understand how
it's calculated or uh why we get what we
get and that's something that's you know
she and I have have both expressed our
frustration with trying to figure out
where that number comes from um I mean
it's a real number
but okay as long as we're fairly
confident in it so does anybody have any
further questions on that Revenue
section oh what's up okay I do sorry
Mark real quick I know that this year we
added 40,000 sorry we're going line by
line wait let me just make sure I'm in
the right
spot I don't want to
[Music]
overstep I'll wait it's not in this
section sorry
okay all right all right well we'll go
ahead I guess go on to the next section
which is kind of the miscellaneous
Revenue so we've got Municipal grants in
Aid M as Tucket peat funds state
miscellaneous uh Municipal stabilization
this is the line that Eric talked about
that if our budget increases too much we
would potentially lose some of that
Grant uh neglected Cemetery grants been
zeroed out we'll apply for it but it's
not a big chunk of money here we'll see
whether we get it um disabled program
flat um pilot just for those of you that
aren't familiar with this acronym that's
payment in lie of taxes so basically if
the state owns property in your town
that property is not available for
property tax uh assessment and so the
state will make the payment and L of
taxes uh to replace that so state
buildings airports you know rways things
like that um that usually comes in
payment L of taxes so
that's slightly up um early voting so I
this is a stipend Eric to offset the
cost of early
voting yeah so previously we did get
stiens for that
um so but it and there is a proposal
right now to fund early voting for towns
because that was another unfunded State
mandate when they decided you had to
have the polling place open for so long
unknown whether that's going to get
through the budget so until it is I
don't want to count on revenue from that
until we know we're likely to actually
get
something okay fair
enough uh not a ton of money but it
would be great to cover that uh senior
Transportation Grant uh so you're also
taking that down to zero um opportunity
to pick that up again yeah we're we're
working on it um but you know that's one
of those things where it's really hit or
miss and it's never
funded um there's so many people it's
such a small pool of money that the
federal government gives the state that
um you know we've gotten a fair bit of
money from it in the past but like right
now we're getting nothing for it so I
think it's safer to leave it at zero
yeah um and if we get the Grant and we
start getting refunded for it great we
use that offset the cost of senior
Transportation okay how do we get that
Grant Eric is that something we have to
apply for yep yes we do so have we gone
through the application process or or is
it uh we
are we are right now we are applying for
two things we're applying for the uh
actually two senior Transportation
grants one of them to fund op operations
and one of them to purchase a
replacement for our van um then that
will be an 8020 uh Grant so if we get
that the state will will reimburse us
80% of the cost of raise replacing our
existing uh
van right that would be a different line
item though right yeah I mean honestly
the neither of those grants I think
realistically have more than a 50 %
chance of getting it so I don't like to
budget for things that are you know kind
of moonshots and even if we did get it
it would probably be the budget after
this where we'd have to appropriate our
20%
um uh the last time we applied for and
we got the 17 passenger van I think we
applied in
2019 we applied in 20
2020 we got accepted in
2021 they delivered it in
2024 so these are kind of nebulous
things wow yeah hurry up and
wait okay okay and then the last uh line
in this section is ECS this is
educational cost sharing funds so these
are funds reallocated by the state to uh
try to level the available school
funding um and we're down about
$889,000 on that and as the note here
says this is from the uh Governor's
proposed budget sheet and this is going
to be what it is we can't really control
it and there's some talk about restoring
some of this I think isn't it Eric I
don't really know yeah so you may have
heard the governor pronouncing that he's
added a whole lot more money to ECS
funding and they're accelerating the
schedule for ECS
funding um but the the schedule all
along has included less funding for the
wealthier rural
towns so um you know every year they
they basically cut the budget the
governor cuts that line for the small
towns funds the bigger schools more and
then cost and the other small town
organizations go after them and they
negotiate it and hopefully we get back
to zero but that's been zero that's been
roughly two million now
since
200 11 something like that so we haven't
gotten an increase in that in many years
that's all I was gonna ask ER thank you
Mark sorry that's all I was goingon to
ask we generally it comes back in so
that's that's a lot right I mean I I
feel like historically we it's been re
it's come back in and we've gotten what
we anticipated
right Eric yeah yeah maybe I mean the
the problem is right now the governor's
budget still has a you know $230 million
hole in it so no we we I I understand
that and I know it's a long night and a
long meeting I get that I mean but just
for the sake of it historically we have
gotten it back so it's it's hard to
deduct 90 from it you know
but just a thank you yeah right now we
kind of have to unless we know have a
good sense of it yeah sure
yeah any other questions on these
items I don't think mine came up yet NOP
no not yet all right so we'll go into
the last uh Revenue section so we have
miscellaneous
Revenue uh 1,500 bucks um rentals this
is uh we used to rent the soccer fields
Etc so that's not happening in the way
it was so that's reduced quite a bit uh
clerk fees these are primarily for
building permits I believe Eric right so
that's kind of the the clerk fees are
anytime you buy and sell property
there's a real estate transaction fee in
the town yeah so it's not the building
but the transactional fees okay correct
and you had said before that they
weren't coming in quite as high as we
had expected in the past yeah I mean we
it's it's all about trying to kind of
forecast what the housing market is
going to do locally and there don't seem
to be a lot of houses selling right now
so I don't think we're gonna see you
know an in appreciable uptick in those
fees yeah and you've got a 12mon run
rate there so that's matches what we're
budgeting
okay uh transfer station that's fairly
predictable we got that basically flat
waste
Redemption uh more we've got we've got
up a little bit based on uh kind of
a under the new contracts for cassella
base State Tex okay so recycling you've
got uh we've got some pickup
there and then building and land use
fees so last 12 months again run rate
data about 75k so you're budgeting there
okay yeah I'm assuming roughly the same
transaction we
are trying to hold contractors a little
bit more accountable for what they
actually report for costs for doing
construction um so that may go up a
little bit but it's it's hard to predict
okay and then I'll also include this
interest line which is uh I think based
on the stiff account so we've done
pretty well over the last 12 months but
as you note in the comments the uh fed
is likely reduce uh interest rates which
will have a direct impact on this they
didn't today they held them steady but
that's because of some of the
uncertainty uh but you know I think it's
a fair bet we'll see some reduction
especially it looks like we're slipping
into any kind of recessionary
area
so any questions from the board on those
line
items
com okay so we have the ram education
Eric already addressed this this is not
locked in yet um and even
is it's got to be approved by voters but
of course that will likely happen
I uh and then we have the AES uh Board
of Ed budget um which is again it is uh
what was uh approved by the Board of
Ed so we get into our uh areas of
expense so we've got uh I think we've
talked about at least some of these the
Town Administrator and the
administrative assistant um amounts here
you can see with slight
increases uh talked about the project
manager so this is uh you've actually
got a a contract for that Eric so I
don't but the board of Selectmen has
come to terms with what they're willing
to pay for it and it's acceptable to the
individual we're we're talking to
so and frankly until we're actually
starting construction and I need a
construct C
administrator um i' still got three or
four more months before I need to be
worrying about having that contract in
place all right Joan yeah I understand
thank you for that um I I understand
that you want to wait and that's great
till it's timely and comes into play
will it be you know is there a length of
time assigned to it or will that all be
determined when the job starts and when
you need this project manager
for yeah that's stly job
based
um and depending on exactly where we
come out and how much we sub out and how
much we do in house um I may be able to
pay some of that even though I'm paying
it out of this line item uh right here
that may count a a significant portion
of that will probably count towards the
town match for the grant so that will
Preserve res ve funding that we would
have spent out of the multi-use building
fund I think that was my my thought
because if you have this much in your
line item and you have multiple projects
so you'll do like a contract by contract
with the person I we and we don't need
to know that now but the line item could
be used for multiple projects is what
you're thinking okay yes so it'll stay
in there and use it as needed got it
okay correct thank you
okay um so last year Employee
Appreciation mobile phone
straightforward and mileage there's the
question mark still considering the
Employee Appreciation line item Eric I
it's not a lot
of two things
one um I've gotten a little bit of a
talking to for the auditor on a couple
of occasions for for self-funding things
um when I really shouldn't be um we have
no funding
to do anything for employees either so
when we do employee picnics that comes
out of my pocket um anything we do of
that nature I just fund um and I know
I'm not supposed to technically be doing
it but but I'm not asking for a lot of
money for that but I think that's
something the town should
consider but it is a budget increase so
you can consider it or
not I I've seen if you don't mind
speaking I I understand in the budgets
and like I work in a school system
there's usually under the administrator
does have an administrative fund
where they might you know obviously you
can't appreciate everyone all the time
but they might have like a yearend
picnic or something you know like that
are you thinking of an ongoing thing I'm
not picking at what you do I think it's
great to appreciate employees everybody
likes that but I have seen a line item
like that is that what you do do like
one major party where you can appreciate
everyone that kind of thing um so I mean
I don't need a long sorry Sor I didn't
yeah thank you yeah no I mean I think
it's good to do employee Barbecues in
the summer um well one is good you know
I mean it I'm sure they'd appreciate it
yeah yeah
yep no yep thank you that's all I have
seen it before it's not uncommon is what
I was sharing with the board I know I
sometimes share other things but
yeah okay other uh questions or comments
on this
section okay I guess we'll move down
then Treasurer
Financial uh we have a Treasurer salary
saying flat Treasurer clerk
wages um slight increase um the
assistant Treasurer stien we have an
additional amount there I think had some
conversations about that maybe uh
conference seminar so low uh contract
software maintenance uh that's as you
can see the note here that's to cover
the QuickBooks which used to be in the
town office suppli so I'd agree with
that moving that and office supplies um
that's up quite a bit Eric too so we
want to talk about that and then mileage
is mileage so uh Joanne you had your
hand up yeah I was just gonna say that
um I'm hoping that a some point tonight
we can go through the budget that I'd
like to go into executive session to
discuss a few personal money related
things so I don't think it's appropriate
to talk about it in person you know in a
meeting like this I know Eric redirected
me I'll keep it brief there's been a lot
of things done and um you know not just
here on a few things so it's an
appropriate time to just ask if we can
have an executive session somewhere to
discuss a few things that have come up
you know a brief thing to notify the
board of some findings or information
not findings just information and see
how want to go forward if we're okay
with that let's kind of hold that off
then specific so that's why I won't make
any remark on some of these I'll hold it
off okay yeah other questions on this uh
this
section okay I guess we'll go down to
the town clerk uh area so we have a town
clerk salary uh supplemental is is gone
because as we know the the suppl just as
I guess for a little bit of background
for those of you who are newer to the
board the town clerk had asked for an
increase um we were a little concerned
about just increasing the town clerk
salary out of hand uh but we decided the
town clerk was
worth uh some extra money due to her
experience so we put that into a
supplemental line item and the reason we
did that was to avoid setting too much
of a precedent should the town clerk
leave or retire which is now happened we
were to hire somebody who was more of an
entry level we would not expect to pay
them at the same level so that was why
that supplemental line was there and
it's now zeroed out um the assistant
town clerk salary basically flat not
much change there conference training
equipment maintenance these are all kind
of small line items office
supplies um land records films mapping
memberships statistics so a lot of this
stuff is basically flat you see a lot of
zeros for the
change um so pretty straightforward the
line on the town clerk salaries we need
to figure this one out I guess we need
to we need to find a town clerk would be
the what's going to happen there I don't
know Eric if you have anything any
comments on that chair I mean ultimately
the board of Selectmen has to make a
decision whether they want to appoint an
official Town Clerk or not um if they
don't then in uh November there will be
elections for that
position so it's up to them whether they
what how they want to do it and that's
not my take on it that's the town's
attorneys take of it yeah y okay Joanne
yeah this because I feel like this is a
generic question it's not um I was kind
of wondering the same thing because I
know they've mentioned in their Board of
Selectmen meetings that we all know the
person in the position has
retired and so now we have this line
still here with a lot of attachments to
it so yeah my followup was going to
be if they had made a
decision uh maybe I better wrap it
around in the other discussion I'll just
I'll save it because it's going to
affect the amount in this line because I
know that they were going to have
someone be a consultant in that position
and help along any employees in the
office so I'm thinking this
line you know but ER kind sorry I'm
thinking out loud in processing I I
guess we need
to decide what it needs to be at for the
coming year and it's until the BOS
decides what they're going to do I guess
we won't know I thank you sorry
processed it out loud but it is attached
to a lot of things like healthare and
you know big money items so
yeah sure we kind of have to have to
figure out when a person a new person
would come online right and how much of
the the year is left to compensate that
person but then have a different line
for the consultant
at that salary rate is that kind of what
you're I I think you'd have to I don't
think I'd want to add add another
account for for another line item for a
consultant I think you just probably pay
it out of that salary I think kosher you
know be okay yeah good followup is that
what's happening Eric because I I mean
for that I mean not talking about
someone's personal that's been out loud
and said so as far as retiring I would
imagine the consultant or job being
performed is getting paid out of that
line or we're in this year's budget for
next year you just don't know from July
on I guess I don't honestly even know
what we're doing now uh I mean you know
because that's that's not something I
have any direct input into and I don't
think to my knowledge the board hasn't
made any specific decisions on that so
okay
yeah thanks yep
I mean so basically what we've got is
the current salary
rate uh kind of an estimated uh but at a
3%
increase so um seems reasonable but you
know again they may be able to if they
hire somebody they may be able to
negotiate a lower
salary and Mark that was my idea you
know seemingly that might be somewhere
that could be trimmed a little based on
what seems to be going to happen we can
kind of project that maybe not a lot but
if we're looking to save the taxpayers
if you know and then whatever they
decide will know moving forward yeah I
think it's risky to trim it without
knowing what's going to happen you know
I mean it'd be great to it'd be a
windfall if we budget it at you know 59k
and we come in at 54 you know but
that'll but you know I think it's a I'd
rather budget a few K High personally um
no I hear you and I'm looking at the
history of last year we had that 300,000
Surplus so hopefully that could we have
a few areas like that like the ECS
funding could be a potential extra
89,000 in the budget and I so I know
we're at the beginning I hear you though
well yeah go ahead Eric so the one thing
I would say is that that line item is
for the town clerk's salary not the
assistant town clerk's salary because
that's a union position right but the
town clerk salary that is solely at the
jurisdiction of the board of Finance the
board of Selectmen does not get to vote
we in on that they get to appoint a town
clerk you as the board of Finance get to
determine their salary that's right of
course that's right yeah
yeah so the salary will be what it is on
an
annual I Wason say it depend on the
it'll depend on the uh experience of the
person I would think well no I don't
think so actually that's that's the
point Eric's making um the board of
Finance sets the town clerk's salary
right so we have the
right yeah you know if we set this at
$4,000 then that's the salary we said
that true that's the salary that's
that's not happened but that will be
discussed so um I thought and we had a
lot of discussion thought discussion and
a lot of background and everything
because of the person that had been in
it and we came up with this thing with
the extra supplemental because this
person that we have that just retired
was so experienced and had been there so
long and then we took a lot of input and
raised the regular salary too just a
couple years ago
so% yeah it was a much yeah right but if
they I think yeah we went 6% at that
time or something I mean she had good
arguments but I'm saying if we set this
at a certain thing you're saying that's
it they have to I I mean I've seen other
things happen when someone is appointed
as Town Clerk or is elected as town
clerk that will be their salary if the
board of selectman hires a consultant to
the town to help uh Provide support for
people doing the function then I think
that would not apply the consultant
would be whatever rate the board of
Selectmen
negotiates um so that would be that's a
separate thing but the town clerk is a
is an elected position and per the
charter the board of Finance sets sets
that salary so what we're doing now is
we're going to set the salary for anyone
who is either appointed or elected a
town clerk for next year then I don't
feel comfortable thinking we don't know
that we're going to get someone that's
up to the caliber of the person we had
we and I'm not trying to take anything
away we have no idea if they're going to
hire fulltime you know unless there's
Charter and stipulation
so I think that's an area we should
maybe talk about because talk about it
now because we got to make a decision
you know I guess this would be kind of
what I was trying to say earlier if we
have if somebody wants to make a motion
to change any of these numbers while
we're in this section it's probably the
time right but I I feel having put a lot
of time and effort missed a meeting last
week and everything if I want to make
some changes based on some data I get
next week I may come back to you all and
say it but oh yeah we can always do that
that's of course that's 100% yeah I
mean everything's in flux but what I but
what I think we should do is if anybody
has anything they definitely want to
address now is the time to make the
change and to to highlight that doesn't
mean we can't change it next week or the
week after or the week after thank you
does any I I don't want to be the only
one talking to this does does everyone
feel they want to keep it at the high
level of the prior person or should we
well remember we took out the $6,000
supplement so it's not quite at the
level that Carol was making Carol would
have made that 5 were
57750 plus 6,000 so she would have made
roughly
63,000 so we right we raised her to that
level based on all of her knowledge all
the the little things that Eric had sent
us I'm not trying to be a cheap skate or
anything I understand it's like a
34-hour week I think if if Eric wants to
back up the position I as to I'm just
saying should we think about like maybe
50,000 I'm not looking to go way down
because we just don't know who we're
going to get I hope you know unless
everyone's totally against it and
they're like Joanne just leave it then
I'll I'll back off I don't I don't yeah
it's impossible to know who we're GNA
get it's like we basically are G to be
paying them for doing the job yeah and I
don't mind I I said my piece if everyone
is fine with it then I'll leave
it I mean my thought
is you know is that a competitive number
too right or I mean in terms of compe
you know what I mean surrounding towns
and whatnot so um is that the prevailing
kind of number so we looked at this many
times in the past too and based on the
size of the town and
everything you know that's how we
basically came up with this number um
right obviously we had a number because
of Carol's uh you know I shouldn't say
that because of the person's tenure we
we ra it and we added that that I guess
in my mind um Joe Joanne I think the
number is a a nice stable number because
we'd rather I think we'd rather hire
someone that's competent and maybe
already trained and you know at being a
clerk rather than try and hire someone
that has no training and have to bring
them up to speed over the years just to
save some money I would rather hire
someone that knows what they're doing so
and at a at a rate that is you know for
the size we are and I think the rate
that we have there is pretty close to
what for a small town with all the data
that uh we were handed over the last
couple years it's it's right in there
minus the $6,000 you know what I'm
saying so I'd hate to be short of being
able to hire a good candidate because we
put a budget in there today not knowing
who's going to apply for this job or
yeah if we have to stay with that and we
could never move that line and then any
line the bof said they they need to stay
with it not different I I hear you bill
because we want a good person that's a
valuable a very important position I
just thought if we were in flux could we
lower it this year and then come back to
it if we got a good candidate but if
we're married to that n number and we
could never change it I totally
understand can I just say I
say go ahead can I just say this is an
elected position this is not someone
that we get to select this person's
going to have to run for the
office right good in November yes but
they might be appointed for now someone
might be appointed right so I guess
there's a increase in there also a 3%
increase what if we just eliminated the
$732 increase and went back
to last year's salary La last year's
number yeah
57 yeah that's a great good compromise I
think I would make a motion uh to go
back to last your salary so give me a
number Bill well the number is 5482
minus 17
3250 it's right there right I don't have
my calculator in front of me look at it
57750 57750 thank you there it is so I
would make the motion that we keep the
budget at 57750 for the clown town
clerk's position I'll second
it okay further discussion
hearing none I call for a vote all those
in favor say I I I I any
opposed any
abstentions okay the motion passes we
will put that in there as it
stands and again no no there's nothing
saying we cannot change this in the next
few weeks if for some reason we get a
good information that we shut so good
point
sounds
good it's the 19th right yes yes correct
oh it's been a week
okay okay anything else on this uh
section that anybody wants to
address okay very good thank you let's
move on to tax collector
so uh we have some increase in the tax
collector
salary um so we have a note here Union
memo memorandum of agreement Mo MOA
builds and increases upon testing
completion so we're anticipating or else
that has
happened um so that's the proposed uh
budget Eric is that anticipated or is
that person at
that uh
so they are not at that
currently um that's depending on
completion of of their testing
requirements so what we did is
essentially I hired somebody that had
not had any tax collector training
whatsoever and I condition her
compensation on full completion of State
mandated training yeah
okay does anybody have any further
questions for Eric on this just to point
out the other line items are mostly kind
of plus minus so mostly flat just a
quick followup Mark um to Eric totally
under you know want to give her Kudos I
know that she's brought in a lot of the
um all of them really but I mean she's
brought in a lot of the funds and has
collected a lot of the back taxes so
without having that experience she's
doing a great job just wondering Eric at
some point can you please put the mo MOA
in the budget stuff just so that we can
see it and see the rates for the
different things unless it's in there
already I
apologize I thought it was but I can
certainly check on that yeah no rush
like tonight just in the past just so
that we see how that thank you that's
all any other
questions okay I guess hearing none
let's move on to the assessor
section so we have a again the 3.8%
increase on the assess and the
assistance assessor salaries so some
minor
changes uh we have a contract the
software cost increase in this qds and
uh Vision software I don't know if any
of you have ever looked at that online
but it helps manage the uh the
assessments and you can look up your own
uh property uh or any property that is
in there frankly uh to understand the
assessment cards and see what the
breakout is uh mileage flat um reduction
subscriptions so any questions on this
one or suggested changes or just quick
one going by so we pay that software
amount every year clearly I mean you
have itre it's that expensive every year
okay thank
you okay if nobody else has any other
questions or input we'll move on to
regist so these are the regist of Voters
uh they receive a I guess a salary uh
it's gone up quite a bit in the last uh
couple of years primarily because of the
early voting I believe they're having to
work a lot more um to to manage that
um most of the other stuff is flat
within a couple hundred bucks uh
training conferences Etc um anybody have
any questions on that for
Eric sorry I know but my questions are
quick and I'll put it up in the memory
bank so theed registrars are present all
the time or there's hours I could look
up online Eric I just yeah I mean
they're not in there you know the whole
time the town hall office is open um
they work their own hours um you know
and I and I submitted to you there in
that list of stuff is there because
again registrars do not work for me in
any way shape or form they are elected
officials so I just simply pass their
budget on to you um so but their
supporting
documentation was in with all the other
stuff so I didn't look at that one too
close but I will so we can move on for
now
and if unless anybody else has questions
anybody else any questions or
comments okay moving down to uh
elections so the election salaries
again um we've got it basically sitting
flat um says C explanation from wall and
Linda that so now that's kind of the
breakout I'm surprised there isn't a
little bit of higher cost but I I guess
we had to do some of the early voting
last year so it's it's probably why it's
in there must have anticipated it some
degree so the election salaries are a
separate line item from the regist or
yes and so so I can kind of explain that
a little bit if you walked into the
building on Election Day you would see
at any given time probably seven or
eight people working and everybody's got
their own pay scale based on what they
do um but the state mandates how many
and and what of each employee have to be
present both during early elections as
well as during
uh you know the regular election so
those are just you know that pays for
the moderator that pays for the the
little
polling the guy who sits there and
watches you put your ballot in the
little box
um that's what all that salary comes out
of thank you
yep any other questions or comments
okay we'll move down to the building
department
sorry okay so we can look at the numbers
we already had
a presentation by Jay over the most of
the I guess variable costs we have a
reduction in the zoning Agent salary
noting that uh the offer letter is uh
change for changing Z Zeo per offer
letter $31 an hour at 19 hours
weekly um Town planner we we jumped up
the cost of the planner is around 48k a
year have been offsetting with PCD
implementation
fund yeah so in the past we had had a
Permanent Fund called The pccd
implementation fund because what had
happened going back in previous budget
years and it occurred to me when I was
the chair of PCC when it came time to do
the plan of conservation and development
we went to the board and said okay now
we need 60 Grand or 70 grand to do the
plan and the board's like well you know
we don't want to pay for that so we got
the board to put the money in every year
over that 10 years so it wasn't a big
shock at the end so instead of using
just hiring a consultant to do the p CD
the board of Selectmen made a decision
to just hire an actual part-time Town
planer and we hired a firm called Tai ch
um and we use a guy named John gusowski
as our chief
planner um and then you know his he is
then responsible for as part of his role
as a town planner for doing the plan of
conservation and development and the
affordable housing plan um and all the
other state mandated plan that towns
have to produce yeah I remember that
yeah okay questions for Eric on
this yeah do we have to accept that that
jump can
we I mean that's a 33% increase I don't
know how people feel about that pretty
high increase well I yeah I'll follow up
both of you when you talk to I had a
thought yeah I agree it's not actually
an increase we're not paying him more
than we were paying him we're just
paying him all out of this line item as
opposed to supplementing from the pocd
implementation fund to pay
it if that makes sense so we were paying
him this amount basically before but cor
part coming from another coming from the
fund correct we were only because we had
money in the pccd implementation fund we
paid his salary out of both locations so
it wasn't as big hit to the the public
um but since we've kind of run through
that money now it all comes out of the
Town planner line that was my question
okay so that's basically exhausted at
this point got correct thank you and my
question oh go ahead I was gonna say so
so what was his combination
salary so it says 23 24 it was 44,000
what were we paying them out of the
other
budget or uh I mean what was the what
was the combo payment before now we're
Say it'll be
48,000 yeah he's basically running his
cost for us the last three years his
standard Town contract is essentially
4,000 a month so that's what we're
paying 4 month oh sorry
yep does he still work I from what I
remember he works in a variety of towns
right he right am I wrong with that he's
not just an Andover person he I mean I
know he's very knowledgeable I've seen
him in meetings and all those kind of
things when you need him in land use
things or planning things and very well
spoken does a good job but I'm kind of
of the same thing too has he done like
I'm sure you like having him there and
it's it's good for the town but has he
done the majority of his planning
already because the affordable housing
plan the different things or is this an
ongoing process I guess kind of what was
saying is this something we definitely
need this year this big of an
amount I mean you either have a town
planner or you don't I I I think he's
not going to you're not going to go back
to him and say oh we only want to hire
you for $20,000 a year I think you
either agree to have a town planner or
you don't um the town in the past ran
without a town
planner um how many years has he been
has it been about three or four years
now yeah he's been the town planner now
for just over two years oh yeah we I
remember having the discussion finance
and elsewhere to about how to handle
this because it it's a fair amount of
Burden right the planning of zoning and
development and the or the planet
conservation and the uh housing plan is
really an issue too right
so right and I guess my follow-up
thought is in looking in this department
Department in general I know all of the
town you know departments are so are you
know busy enough or whatever for a small
town that we are this is just probably
one of the less busy departments right
now as the proof in the building permits
and just the state of nobody's building
nobody's moving you know the economy and
the the rates all because of that so it
seems like we're putting a lot of money
in this department and I know we have to
have one so
I don't know where we're going with that
but uh and I'll look into this a little
bit more because I've focused on other
places but I know we you know we share
the building inspector and we have to
have a zoning agent we have to have all
these things I get it um it just seems
like
a for a slow moving Department right now
it's a you know a high expenditure is
what I'm trying to say but I'll I'll do
more research in circle back to it yeah
I mean building may be down but you know
things still happen every every week you
know small things small people build
decks people I just had solar installed
so the inspector will be out at my house
next week probably no I get that I love
building it's just very very slow I
would just happened to be at the Town
Hall and went in there and had a
discussion with them when I was there
last week yeah you're right it could
pick up Spring's coming you never
know I'm all set
other questions or
comments okay we're going down to the
library uh so we've got a 2 and a half%
increase on the
payroll uh this assumes a 3% increase
for Board of
Selectmen um Library
operations basically
flat any questions or comments on the
library
okay I guess we'll go to civil
preparedness I was get a kick out of
this
one we have a $3,000 budget through
$3,200 so slight increase in our civil
preparedness salary uh comment here this
is offset with a grant from uh the Dem
so is this the Democratic party no
Department of Emergency Management
Services oh ah I'm going to capitalize
this actually I'm WR
out and remind me oh well let me wait I
was going to say what what's the C
vehicle is there money in that line item
what's the CT vehicle I know you told me
that one here so we in Malboro help pay
the maintenance cost
for the vehicle that the C team because
we have kind of a combined team with the
towns of Hein and Malboro it's Community
Emergency Response Team right that's at
the search right okay correct and Hein
just used a bunch of their arpa funds
and bought them a brand new you know
vehicle so we didn't pay any for the
cost of the vehicle Hein dropped around
60 Grand to outfit the new vehicle
because we were using a a castoff
ambulance for a long
time
um so this just pays for any damage or
repairs or anything we need for the
vehicle so and Eric some of this is uh
State mandated positions right or
activities or no well so there's kind of
two things there in terms of the Sal
line item um we are technically as a
town required to have an emergency
management
director and uh an
EMC so technically this pays for the
Emergency Management
coordinator um and that's what that line
item does and
by uh by Charter essentially either
first selectman or myself ends up being
the Emergency Management director so
that falls on me so I don't get paid for
that portion um but this the the person
that's the kind of the number two for
that does get
paid anybody have any further questions
for Eric on
this comments no okay
okay we'll go ahead and move on the next
section is the community center so we
have a slight decrease in the proposed
wages for the
director um based on the current
contract and then extrapolated
full-time okay
um
we that shouldn't say extrapolated the
fulltime anymore because the board of
Selectmen neglected decided not to do
that so you can just based on
perod yeah
yeah wait say that again say that
again what did you just changed I'm
sorry so all we did was change the
verbage so I had originally proposed to
the board of Selectmen a higher salary
for that position to change it to a
34-hour
week position um the board of selectman
declined to do that so therefore uh her
salary is basically what's in her uh
contract okay um can you can you just uh
Mark scroll up I just wanted to see the
note
again um it changed B on so yeah so what
had said before was based on
extrapolation to fulltime that's when
Eric had a larger number so that should
have been changed when it was uced to
this to this contract
number
so the r like this would be the way to
think about it and then we've got an
increase in the uh Community Center
assistant wages the note here is
currently $20 an hour assuming 10 hours
uh per week so that's just a multiplier
there thought that's what she was at
before it is oh
okay came on board I think yeah yeah
okay everything else is there's some
reduction some increase um what is the
software cover my senior center
software yeah that's that's
still yeah review by the board and that
is also something we're trying to pick
pick up the cost of that through one of
the transportation
grants no doesn't seem like we're going
to be able to do it but but we're trying
to pay for that
elsewhere if we can okay Joan you I was
thinking should we because should we
highlight that cell as a thing because I
know the board of Selectmen have not
approved that at all yet and there's
thought of it um you know just wait a
while letting letting things run I know
this yes it was a definite no it hadn't
been approved at all yet right correct
and I understand like why yeah so I I'm
hoping at the end of this meeting we
pick a me a some kind of color to
designate things to go back to I I'm
good with colors on my spreadsheets too
just to not forget things I mean it's
small things but we have to be really
reticent if that's the word uh just go
with what we've heard in meetings of
what they've said maybe it'll come down
the pike but I know it's a a no so
far right so should
weate
that because Board of selectman said
they're not ready they didn't approve
that should we move that to zero well
someone wants to make a motion I'm fine
to I it really hasn't been approved yet
I don't think it should be in the budget
when it hasn't been well if there's a
chance they will approve it we don't
want to have the budget shorted so it's
a little bit of a you know how to you
pick your poison I mean it's $1800 we'll
cover it somewhere
but I get it I like to just stay steady
with what I hear in meetings and I'm
just such a literal person so you know
we we're adding in all these things in
case in case in case and then the
taxpayers are paying for them before
need to it's just my take on it you know
I don't mind when things get approved
and things like that um you know maybe
we could can't we basically make a
decision that we agree
that it's not a time to add this piece
of technology and well yeah I mean we
can certainly we can certainly zero it
you know and uh I think we make a motion
to zero we it's not really up to us to
decide how the money gets spent
ultimately that'll be up to the board of
Selectmen uh working with Eric um but
you know we can certainly zero this line
item and if they decide they want it
they can we can try to find it out of
somewhere
else right so let me ask Eric a
follow-up
question maybe it was the building
maintenance fund but I know that there
was that sound proofing and acoustic
work done in both the community room at
the Town Hall and the community center
which was quite a bit did you find that
in the budget somewhere we hadn't
budgeted that last year right yeah that
was taken straight out of the building
maintenance fund
okay
okay do anybody want to make a motion
here or yeah I'm gonna make a motion I
mean I'm gonna make a motion to remove
this because I don't feel comfortable
with what I heard in the other meetings
and I'm
happy I'm sorry Kim did you second it
yes I am
okay any further
discussion just putting it out there
it's not going to be a bad thing when it
does come on board but I just want to
kind of stick with the things that were
approved already so that's my
discussion I don't know if you guys saw
there's a chat U message I did I'm I'm
I'm you know I guess we uh Tess if you
want to go ahead and unmute we'll if you
can make it brief we'll uh we'll listen
to what you have to say there
yeah I just want to know if um if the
community and Senior Center has the
raises the funds to put the software in
would that be acceptable to the board of
Finance it's that's up to the board of
selectman really that's really an
executive decision so you know our our
our role as a board of Finance is just
to uh establish the budget and set kind
of spending policy and limits um so the
specific the specific activities that
take place within the department are
really controlled by the department
heads Eric and the board of selectman so
we for us it would be neutral I would
say okay so unfortunately with all the
programs it has more to do with all the
programs involved it has to do with
drivers it has to do with um scheduling
it has to do with a whole lot of other
things other than just programs and so I
just want the board of Finance to
understand that um there's more
involved with just
programs so if the community and Senior
Center has the ability to raise funds um
through
fundraising um would they be more
inclined to accept that well I think the
board of selectman certainly would but
it's really their decision not ours so
right this is nothing personal I'm sure
like I said it's a good program I'm just
going by what I've heard the board of
Selectmen say already test this has
nothing to do with yeah that kind I just
like to be very literal and and see
things represented on the spreadsheet
the way I heard them yeah so yeah so the
the the premise here is that the board
of selectman hasn't approved the
expenditure so we don't feel like
necessarily we should budget for it
correct understood thank you
yeah any further discussion from the
board of Finance on this
item okay I guess all those in favor of
the motion to reduce it to zero Z say I
I I
I I'll vote I also any opposed I okay
bills opposed any
abstentions okay motion passes we'll
zero that out on this one right here
again not saying we can't make a change
if we get more information or uh change
of heart before we've approved our final
budget okay you understand you took out
every bit of
software that that facility pays for so
I don't think that's understand no canva
no nothing you want her to have a
computer an email and that's it well
Eric you didn't tell us that you know
and and we're going on the thank you for
telling us after our whole discussion is
over where's the line level where's the
line level detail what does that take us
Eric I mean maybe do we have enough
information to make a
reasonable what is it that do we know
what the board of Selectmen is in favor
of or not in favor
of well what did we take off Eric What
expenses did we take off of course we
want her to have computer programs and I
work at a a school system that has
software and computer things so I don't
know what they pay every year what is
the yearly I thought this was the line
for the additional program that has been
discussed so if we don't have that
detail well right yeah I mean detail you
know what I will get back to you on that
I can't tell you exactly every piece of
software that office we we don't expect
you so we admit that we could have been
wrong and took this as just the one
that's been discussed so thank you for
bringing it to our attention it's just
information we get that you don't have
everything at your fingertips thank you
okay so so the board can leave it at
zero we could also make a motion and
change it back to where it was pending
more information
right I would say at a minimum fund the
$120 annual subscription for
Cana um because we can probably cover
that departments Office 365 out of the
town uh software budget if you want to
do
that that's $120 Eric K was 120 annual I
say we Circle back because I I get it
and thank you for bringing that to our
attention with what we thought we were
doing but I have a feeling you know
should we just wait you know before we
make 10 motions on one line I mean we
can always put it back
in comes up something yeah something
next week rather than back right now
we've taken it out and thinking what we
thought and now we'll get more
information maybe put something back in
okay all right well if everyone's okay
with that we will uh continue to look
here U most of the other stuff is
reductions kind of based on current uh
expect expectations you know we reduce
the electricity budget uh based on the
usage we've seen so far so that's good a
couple other things here internet cable
voice um adding a few things align items
here kitchen supplies conference
seminars postage uh printing so a few
things that we probably did not uh
anticipate when in the original Senior
Center budget or Community Center budget
um anybody have any questions from that
on
those well only because Eric brought it
up too so it brought a good point I
would imagine that the community
center is included and gets to use
things that the town
have I mean how would you imagine that
well you're opening my eyes I'm learning
all the time listen my brain has to keep
moving and working so this is good I
because ours town is a Tiny Town like I
love to call it and it's right next door
to the town hall and I I just maybe
thought that everything could be
connected so I noticed that there's a
telephone thing here that will come up
in the town office building too no so so
you're saying that
it's possible that they can't access
whatever software the town hall has we
can't add her on as a
user well they usually pay per license
per per exactly pay pay for a license
for well but does it really matter
whether you add it in the department
that's using it or in the town hall
Department no and I'm not going to
nitpick that much but I'm just hoping
that we're it can be used that way or
I'm learning you know so that I won't
bring up something in a meeting that
shouldn't have been brought up so I
guess I just assumed it was a town
person and and we'll move on I not a
question I need to have answered right
now but
thanks any other questions on this
section can I just ask about the the
computer repair service for $2500 it
says add one additional computer is that
the computer for the public or is that
for the offices I'm just curious that's
all so they have asked for two computers
basically one for the uh the assistant
um and one public facing computer for
any senior or person who wants to come
in and use one and access one in the
facility it hasn't I think that's no
decision has been made whether either
one of those that's still up for
negotiation but if we haven't funded it
it doesn't matter okay no I think there
should be extra computers thanks Eric
y okay further questions
comments all right Tess I'm G to unmute
you a little bit more time but we need
to move on okay yeah I appreciate that I
just want to um if if you have um I can
share expand on that uh computer
situation would you like to know one
more
information yes so um we what we have
seen is um just recently we had um a
senior come in and wanting to renew her
driver's license she is not um she does
not have the ability to do that on her
own and so what we um did was I walked
her through the poll process um walked
her through um the department of um
motor vehicle and she renewed her
license at the center and so we're
finding that a lot of seniors do not
have the capability to do that um on
their own and so we would like a
computer that would have Public Access
that we could walk through um that um
that process and and other processes
through the um the senior center for
those those clients um also with one
computer comp with a laptop at the
senior center we are not able to access
the computer at the same time so the
assistant and I both have to share one
computer at the same time and so if we
had another computer she could be
working on certain things like
newsletters um things like that where I
would be able to um access the computer
at the same time if we had three
different
computers that would be ideal if we had
two comp computers um we would um work
with what we have so
um I just want to say Tess I think it's
a great idea I mean I'm in support of
that you need that for what you're
trying to do but a thought popped into
my head I know that they recycle a lot
of things at the school or different I
don't know if we've looked into
possibly um I know where I work they're
tot they upgrade things all the time and
I feel like systems are very new so I'm
just wondering if I'm not saying we
can't do this with budgeting I'm not
trying to nitpick here I think it's very
important we have a new center but
sometimes some places do upgrade so
often that there might be something that
the school or the library media
Specialist or someone is upgrading and
might have one to share I don't know I
know you do a lot of you know
programming there with the school so I
don't know if it's ever come up it's
just a thought I'm I'm I'm totally all
for nitpicking so please Joanne um
please understand that if we have a
computer that can be updated that our um
assistant can use to utilize during that
time and even um if we can use that same
computer for our seniors that we can
train them we can um oh it's it's
fabulous you need it I mean that's what
the center's all there for that's not an
area we're trying to yeah I believe my
computer itself is a laptop and that is
a used computer as well so um what I'm
using currently is not up to dat but it
is um a used computer I'm fully happy
with what I have but I think that an
additional computer or two um computers
even in in um um an air I'm not sure
what it's called
um an iPad might be sufficient as well
okay oh thank you
thanks Hess thank you okay any any other
comments or thought you know changes
that people want to make to this
section okay very good hearing none
we'll move on town office
building okay um we already talked about
the tech support line um this is um not
been updated to the new uh proposal
request W uh from the is it South
Windsor Eric
correct um most of the other items are
it's kind of a net reduction we've got a
little more on um furnace maintenance
seeking a service
contract um corate HVAC so change
wording to HVAC maintenance so okay so
set a furnace it would be actually
heating ventilation air conditioning
HVAC so you're talking about changing
the line item in the budget or the
account name correct okay just to
clarify
that
um website fees is going up quite a
bit so that's our current bill
okay copy rental new contract slightly
lower but now includes click charges and
Community
Center so we put a copy the community
center so that's driving that up is that
no we didn't end up doing putting a
copier in the community center because I
didn't want to pay the extra fee for it
but
because it's far more efficient to print
in the town hall than on the small
copier that Tess has you know we're
running our quick charges are increasing
not the rate of the quick charges but
the amount we're printing to we're using
it more heavily and we're paying usage
fees correct yeah
okay Le monitoring flat reduction in the
Talon
dispatch okay that's good reduction per
assessment so electricity actually going
up here based on heat calculations and
usage but with limited data for the
heating season okay
pay we're using an estimate you feel
like that's okay I'll move my out right
all that anybody have any specific
questions on the town office building
accounts yeah Joan yeah I think I know
we talked about the computer text
support and then we have the software
maintenance um fee and then at the
bottom we had one of the last lines was
another technical computer thing um can
you scroll down a little bit Mark with
my eyes so this computer repair and
service so we do split things up Mar uh
Eric so that is the cost so on average
throughout the entire town hall not
including the server which would be a
capital expense if that needed replacing
we plan on
replacing between two and three PCS a
year um depending on what we need to do
so there we go two and three a year in
our town hall a
PC like your your desktop
thing yeah I mean I have a desktop and I
have a laptop um oh I do too but I I it
hasn't been replaced for years so every
year we count on doing two or three a
year
okay yes how many we do PCS do we have
in
right probably every office right has
one or two like one two three four five
six seven I'm just thinking from walking
through the building I can't tell you on
off the top of my head I mean you know
we're we're typically running about a
fiveyear replacement schedule for for
PCs um something in that
range okay thank you okay yeah that's
helpful that's really the number so you
fix them on fail basically or is it
become
obsolete so yes um or something yes
correct it does seem high to me for what
it is but I'm not you know I'm glad we
pointed it out and that's that's
surprising to me that they would have to
be if we have a contract of a service
person and and some people are only
part-time 19 hours a week and others you
know we I think we have one full-time
person it seems like a high turnover but
it's not a big number so I'll just thank
you for the explanation it's a low
number and I can just tell you from my
work experience um Joanna I mean at
least in the company I just retired from
right yeah I mean three to five years
was you know you look at the computer
software that that takes more and more
uh RAM but more and more your memory I
it changes fast I mean a computer is
outdated in you know three to five years
a computer is outdated oh understood I
thought he said he changes three
desktops every
year as I'm saying so it's in a fiveyear
rotation so right that many yeah right
oh yeah on a five rotation it doesn't
sound excessive is what I'm trying to
say no no okay I was going on the
changing three every year with people
that might work 20 hours a week you know
or something it just I was looking at a
different way your way I understand
thank
you so those could be used in a in a
this community center that's what I was
thinking that's you know me like I was
like hey we might be changing one out if
we change them out every if we do three
a year boom problem
solved let's take one of the
older but you know the seniors they
don't mind like they'd be on there that
would be fine
Tess just said thank you yeah if they're
there don't go to AES for that rotation
go right to the town
hall depending on why they're getting
trying to changed out of course so I
think that the biggest question for us
in this uh section is going to be what
do we do about this computer tech
support um you know maybe we don't go to
$177,000 for the proposed budget but I
think we ought to put a more realistic
number in there if uh indeed as it s 17
I thought it says 12,000 wa what's the7
,000 well this has not been increased
per their new
proposal so the new proposal ER didn't
you say the new proposal is roughly 17
grand yeah their proposal was basically
17,28 yeah so maybe
we what would we do if we didn't agree
to that
[Music]
number I I'm I'm kind of feeling like
what are we going to do if we don't
approve the 17 that they want does that
mean we have to go out and find someone
new to partner with to get the computer
support I mean honestly I would probably
end up negotiating with them and go back
to two half days a year or two half days
a month a month instead of one full day
and one half day which we changed
because we just flat out didn't have
enough time to get stuff done in a
timely manner yeah I remember yeah so I
mean if we really can't budget for it
then then we'll work out something with
them to to address that but yeah we're
not going to get tech support for
much cheaper than that less than that
yeah not when you have things like Eric
mentioned a server specialist I mean you
that's it's not something you get deskt
support you got server Specialists you
probably have hard you know Hardware now
so
it's so I guess my question is is should
that be increased to the 17 or do we
leave it until Eric we get more
information on the negotiation or I mean
you're comfortable leaving it to 12 214
or no I'm not I'm requesting you s it to
17 but you're the board of Finance so
it's your decision to make not my
decision you know once at this point of
the budget those those decisions are
yours not you
know
so
yeah say what if we met in the middle at
like 15 ,000 with that maybe yeah you
can negotiate to 15 for one full day a
week I don't know one and a quarter days
a month so I think if we if we put 15 or
16 in there and you know we don't we
can't negotiate it down you know maybe
the money gets found somewhere else you
know somewhere else so I would make a
motion that we bump this line up to
15,000
even and hope that Eric can negotiate
some type of coverage for 15,000 instead
of
177,000 HE anybody want to second that
I'll second it okay seconds thank you
further
discussion okay hearing none will I take
a vote all those in favor say I I I any
opposed any
extensions okay hearing none we will
change this number to 15,000
at least that way when you go back to
them it looks like we're trying to work
with them exactly thank you yeah good
idea yeah I I I think that was the best
way to
go maybe they'll have pity on us because
we're
poor they probably say the same thing
you know they're they're on a municipal
budget as
well further further changes or
suggestions on this uh this section
okay I guess we'll move down then
advertising so legal ABS these are the
ABS that I think that we have to put in
every time we do things such as have a
town budget meeting we have to notify
the town um uh so we have a slight uh
slight increase here $500 based on last
12 months spend a lot 7300 well we had
and the board of selectman adverts so
let's hope we don't have a series of
board of selectman advertisements like
we have had in the last there you go but
uh
okay any comments or questions on this
section
no okay we'll move on to
insurance
so
esip 10% increase 23k estimate kerma
mark
what's
that you're breaking up a lot you're
cutting out a lot oh I am sorry I move
my speaker closer maybe that's better I
don't know what you can do about it but
okay so I was I was just reading the uh
you know the comments here this esip 10%
increase
23k estimate kerma WC 3% I assume that's
the kerma workers comp 3% increase
411 kerma lap I'm not sure lap is 5%
that's liability and Automotive policy
ah okay so those are the three major
Insurance bills that we pay uh annually
the only thing that's not on here is the
payment for the inground tank which is
paid by the
school
okay so net with a 3.6%
change in line with inflation so and
that's again that's a those are variable
numbers because at some point next year
we're going to get hit with an increase
due to the uh the fact that we're going
to have the squad vehicle online so
that's going to increase our esip
insurance um and I think we've already
got built in for the community center so
those numbers should hold um so we
should be okay with the insurance
numbers as they
are okay any questions for Eric on
this I do um Eric I forget we've had a
few kerma claims in the past am I
allowed to ask that is that to public
are we in two public of a
meeting no you can ask I'm not
referencing a person we're not talking
specific people I think it's it's fine
right right so have we seen a a pretty
big steady increase in the KDE just
because of recent claims or anything of
that
nature no not really um that's claim
history's actually been pretty good
overall okay thanks
yep I'm good other
questions okay I guess we can move on to
employee
benefits
so Social Security and Medicare so we've
got 8%
here
um this is separate from what we talked
about earlier the right so I think this
is where on the health and dental is
that that's where you will do the 7%
right Eric they'll update
it yeah but that not going to effect no
I'm just all about the the corrections I
know it won't we just want to take every
little bit we can then we
can
correct be got flat on unemployment
comp this where he said Health premiums
up
8% uh lower number of
insured so we have a lower number of
people were insuring but the premium
went up so we didn't get the full impact
of the increase so you're at a 2.9%
change and then they still need right
we'll get that corrected right yep that
will go down
slightly all right anything else and I
assume Eric as people come and
go or you know leave you if that
happens before the budget we can and
Mark I guess we can update that like if
we get further info on people or so we
vote on the final budget yep yeah
employees okay all right yeah I mean you
know but again you don't know because
there's a lot of flux in
employees so you know we're we're
calculating this with no spare in the
healthful dental insurance um there's a
5050 chance that'll be over uh a 5050
chance it'll be under it just depends on
who we hire and what their status
is I have one one thing in mind
wondering like you know so we'll just
wait a couple weeks and see if we get
more info no sounds good
thanks further questions for Eric on
this
section
nope okay I guess we'll go on to the
next section which is the own town hall
looks like mostly reductions here
reductions in electricity based on
actual usage and we don't expect a fuel
oil tank fill this next year so actually
taking that down by $870 any
questions no nope
no okay Town
garage so a slight increase in medical
and Drug Testing so are these things
like physicals for the CDLs and things
like that or what are they yeah that
covers both that and the random drug
testing uh that we're required to do for
CDL Drivers got it okay electricity is
down again po potentially swapping out
some of the electric baseboard heat fuel
oil down based on the current contract
at a low rate which we're fortunate
enough to sign so good news there so all
in all we've got a reduction 3.5% any
questions there
it's funny how we have no questions when
you're reducing the
budget yeah I think we should raise
it okay Old Firehouse oh God wonder when
we're going to be able to take this off
the uh oh I
know so we have te it down and build a
new one yeah I
know until de until the
demolition fuel oil yeah we expect a
some fuel oil there okay any questions
for Eric on
this
yeah out the only thing is the the
electrical budget basically um and the
problem is is both for the initial demo
and also for spus batement both con all
the contractors we've looked at it's a
town responsibility to Supply Power and
Water to that
location
so but that bottom line isn't mathing to
me oh this is this is a subtotal of
several subtotals so what you got to
look at is this right here that's the
subtotal okay I'm sorry my mistake yeah
it's I was I had the same reaction
initially yeah okay gotcha y because
usually there's a description next to
the subtotal it's probably the section
in the other columns we we hi but oh oh
okay yeah you're probably right all
right yeah they kind of like
section I'm not sure but
that's I'll take your word for
it yeah both these things Town garage
and Old
Firehouse um okay
okay talking next up we have the uh
auditor um so this is for the annual
audit um so we have a increase there
about 11% this is per the auditor and
you have no formal proposal letter
yet and then we have
um pretty much flat on Actuarial
Services we've been pretty fortunate I
think we have a good town auditor it's
appropriate for our town I think uh
we're pretty fortunate to have the for
the amount of work he's had to put in
over the last few
years any comments on
this it is a big jump but I mean like
you
said I we do have a person that's been
steady and has worked with the treasure
and everything everything that you said
they've done a good job and he
understands the town now
so um I couldn't read the
whole oh it just says this is the amount
of for the auditor but we don't have a
formal okay so that's just an
approximate Eric do you think we might
have the letter you know the
actual before we'll just wait and see
sorry I'm not I won't get caught up on
this thank you I've never gotten them
out of mic on time so no do I think I'm
going to get a formal letter from him no
but he's informal
emailed us and said this is what they're
going to charge for the next
cycle right so next F year yeah fair
enough okay okay further questions or
comments all right we'll go down to the
town
attorney uh this is Dennis Johnson he's
requesting a $1,000 raise also including
labor attorney planning and zoning
committee uh commission l Le uh
litigation so he is um direct the budget
was
15K we're going up to
16k I my view we gotta deal with Dennis
but
uh yeah Eric go ahead yeah so that line
item covers two things that covers the
town attorney and it also covers my use
of labor attorney um when labor issues
come up so that's not all Dennis
Dennis's retainer is actually pretty low
that leaves me about $1,500 to $2,000 a
year to use uh legal advice from a labor
attorney further questions or comments
in this
section okay we'll leave that there for
now then uh Town engineer we're
flat questions or
comments okay probate court this is a
budget established by the probate
court so until we hear that we won't
know for sure Eric yeah no we we ask
them every year what their budget's
going to be and they'll get around to
sending it to us eventually but our
budget will probably be passed by the
time that happens so it's just to guess
okay it hasn't been a big issue in the
past
so okay so the uh sier Cog Connecticut
Regional Council of governments
Connecticut Conference of municipalities
and what's
cost uh Council of small towns Council
of small towns right okay so these are
our membership fees for the these
organizations yeah that's correct
okay and uh
assisting us I think with a lot of
things
so yeah so I think I do
have uh final numbers for both of those
so so I think we are okay with our
current budget
now
okay so we're in the ballpark within a
couple hundred bucks yeah yep okay
further questions or comments from the
board on
that I'll set with me
okay so we'll go down to public works
this is a pretty significant
section um so we have a 3% increase in
salary
overtime same
factor um adding a few hundred for fire
extinguisher testing uh and the note
here is that includes the
additional buildings based on 12 months
of cost okay so you're just factoring
that up not a big
increase reducing for vehicle
maintenance is this just based on
history
Eric uh what we
did yeah that was yes yeah I think we
Jay kind of developed this budget and he
went over it with you I think it might
have been that they don't expect to
replace as many tires this year or
something like that
yeah exactly yeah I mean gave the full
budget breakdown I'm just I don't have
that open right now yeah okay yeah we
went through that pretty closely when he
was
on anybody have any questions on the
Public Works
budget I was gonna I don't have well if
anyone has questions on a particular
line I have a thought that I wanted to
bring forward
so now go ahead I was just thinking I
mean I know eventually we're going to
have to get to a place where we have to
try to make some Cuts you know whether
it be in a fund or something like
this I think this is a big part of the
budget Jay was great they do a great job
and he also brings forward all his
spreadsheets that we were able to look
at I wouldn't be opposed to trying
to make a cut somewhere in here hoping
that
they knowing now that they can transfer
money within lines is my thought so say
we asked them to you know cut a line in
supplies or whatever I'm going to look
at it further um and then knowing that
if they run short in one of their lines
they're able to transfer their money
around I mean I felt like Jay knew that
it was a tight year he kind of said you
know I don't know is anyone
do do you want to make a specific motion
let me shut my thing so I can get closer
and make a motion in a moment or an idea
so I'll be right there I will be right
back with
it what line are we looking at right now
I was gonna I'm gonna let you know with
the thought of even if I make a cut to a
line or suggest a cut to a
$457,000 budget I'm hoping that they're
and thinking and pretty much knowing
from working with budgets that there'll
be money somewhere since we had a
$300,000 you know Surplus this year that
they can fill in the gaps just trying to
make inroads in the budget
so my thought would be
to I would okay that's a
500 okay I'm going to propose that
we I don't want to put anything that I
know they're they're going to need but I
I'm banking on this huge amount of money
so go ahead does someone else have a
thought yeah well the only thing I would
say is that keep in mind out of that
457,000 the vast majority of it is valer
and overtime right so we have a total of
Le little less than
$100,000 in raw expens es some things
such as fire extinguisher testing are
just non-negotiable you have to do that
every year gas diesel I mean some of
it's yeah I mean there's certain things
that are just guesses right vehicle
maintenance diesel
gasoline um supplies um they've got
probably got a pretty good history but
right those and none of it's easy I'm
just gonna propose something if it
doesn't go it doesn't go so you're right
I understand so looking at it it's about
100,000
so I'm going to make a motion that we
reduce the supply line I don't know if I
have to say 301 620
56010 um
by
3500 and so I'm going to make that is
that
165 yep
16,500
yeah okay does anybody want to second
that motion
I'll second it I'll second
it okay I'll second it I'll second
again okay further
discussion I was just going to say none
of this is easy just making an attempt
to whittle away little bit here and see
how how they can do so that's my
discussion y
anybody
else okay we'll go ahead and call for a
vote all those in favor say I I I all
those opposed I
oppos huh nothing I was saying nay it
was nay not
I well
unfortunately um a tie L is not here so
it's a tie so Mark I didn't hear you
right I mean I was wondering I don't
want to vote for it this time yeah I
would say may know the motion doesn't
pass we we can revisit this next we can
revisit
yeah yeah
think that's my only motion on this
particular
okay all right we can go ahead and go to
the next section if there's
any snow removal this one's always just
an estimate right so how are we doing
this year on this
Eric we're gonna be under budget but
we're g to be pretty close this
year mark they had a lot of storms I
mean just from I UND they had a lot of
storms that we can never tell they were
weekends overtime tons of overtime
probably holidays so
I'm sure they ate up a lot of their
budget this year yeah it's just another
one this one's always a crap shoot we
could have a great year have a
significant Surplus or we could have a
really tough year and end up having to
tap the funds right absolutely hate to
do yeah no motions from Joan on this
one any further questions or
comments yeah it's a it's a big nut
I I I like leaving it where it is yeah
okay if nobody's got anything else we'll
move on to the next section which is the
transfer
station okay so we got a 6% increase in
wages they're still pretty pretty low
all over
overall uh compact release went up quite
a bit
huh yep last year incorrectly getting
build for a single compactor I think you
spoke you talked about that yeah yeah
yeah you can look at it either two ways
one we got screwed or two they've been
undercharging us for the past five years
which they have
been so
we're guess finally figured out that
they owned two of the compactors at the
transfer station um you know why they
didn't understand they owned them before
cuz they've always been the ones that
are maintaining those two of them
um and servicing them but they just
finally got around to billing this for
them oh boy I'm I'm happy about the
Tipping fees but is there a reason why
they've gone down so much gonna ask
about that too is that just the actual
yeah that's just based on
actuals um we didn't know this is our
second year of the cassella
contract
and there's a bunch of fees in there
that it's they make those contracts very
hard to figure out um anyway our tipping
fees have been reduced so that's been
good we've been over budgeting
consistently on those um what we're way
under budgeting for is that Bloody
energy and environmental fee which is
kind of a catchall fee that it's really
hard to figure out how they calculate it
um um so that's my best guess based on
what we've been getting build
lately okay so yeah I was gonna ask
about the brush pile removal I mean
$20,000 there's nothing else we can do
about brush like seems like you have
some poppers uh Bill I'm sorry you have
some
loppers I got some gasoline in a match
there you go yeah we'll have a big
bonfire have a bonfire you know bring
some beer that works ,000 for brush I
know it's terrible crazy yeah we we've
gone back and forth on this you know in
the the several years that I've been on
the board of Finance it's it's one of
these things that we just have to budget
for every couple years and uh you know
we've argued you know do you you know if
you split it into a third and then
budget you know budget a third every
year I mean it just do makes sense we
know we're going to have to do it so if
we think it's going to cost that you
know we probably just need to take care
of it How firm is that number
Eric uh the last time we had it done was
about 18 Grand so depending on exactly
when we do it I would anticipate it
would be that or a little bigger so um
because the pile's fairly big at the
moment um and by the time the next
budget season rolls around in the summer
it's going to be a pretty aggressively
big
pile yeah I'm just thinking about the
amount of storms and trees that have
been coming down it's probably a big
brush
pile yeah well remember that's just
stuff that people bring to the brush the
the pile
um that's just what homeowners bring and
unfortunately it would be nice to use
the distinctive Tree Care chipper to
chip it up but the problem is people
aren't very responsible about only
bringing clean stuff there so inevitably
there's metal in there and other junk so
really you got to throw it through
What's called the tub grinder and those
are just stupidly expensive pieces of
Machinery to
operate what happens to the trees like
the ones that fell on Long Hill um Eric
how do we get rid of
those uh so it
depends um something like that a pine um
we just we get rid of it however we can
we can dump some stuff on our pit um
Pines nobody wants to burn so we can
almost never give that away for firewood
so we end up getting if the utility
company doesn't deal with it we end up
getting distinctive free care or
somebody else to haul it away and
dispose of it oh all right thank you
a questions for Eric on the transfer
station further questions
SL okay hearing none we'll go down to
recycling
yeah
well uh hazardous way down slightly used
oil pickup that's a pretty big bump up
20% 27% per contract Western
Oil
okay and a freeze pick up same thing
okay uh slight increase in the tire
pickups and no new cost I anybody have
any questions
here nothing for
me nothing going to ground kid so we
have a slight
increase um for mowing and you have a
note here needs adjusting no current
contracts yeah so and over Landscaping
informed us that they're not going to do
it anymore we think we have another
company that's agreed to do it at that I
got to decide whether I send that whole
project out to RFP and and get bids on
it this spring um for
the um n non field mowing which is the
cheap stuff the the field mowing is the
expensive
part um and this isn't just mowing this
is the majority of this cost is the cost
of maintaining the athletic field um
both the sprinkler system and mowing the
field and irrigating the field and
fertilizing it and grubs and all that
stuff so
that's what most of the the ground care
cost
is the uh the beautification
commission um sent you a big spreadsheet
on everything they want to do um that
line item was a fairly significant uh
increase um but for the most part it's a
bunch of volunteers that do the labor
themselves so you get a lot of bang for
your buck but but it is a jump at
Cost well there's some additional area
with the um Community Center too right
there's kind of like additional areas
being added to that all the
time thinking like the this the new sign
going in for town like there's more
areas that have to be beautified every
year too right yeah I mean it's it's
definitely if you look at gets done
versus what's spent you know it's
generally they do a pretty good job I
mean I I don't fault them at all they're
you know they're a bunch of volunteers
that like to go out and plant stuff and
make the town look far as I'm money well
spent but it is an increase so Mark can
I ask about the mowing care again I mean
it comes up as and wait a minute yeah I
know we talk about it it just this is
nothing that our Public Works can't
handle you know and we have to contract
out I mean I know you've explained it
and all it just seems It's been it's
been a point of contention and I've
heard from taxpayers that they just ask
me things when they look at things or
they know we got the brand new Mower and
I know you just said it doesn't include
all of mowing but does our Public Works
have time to I'm not managing their time
there's it's just a big expense do they
have time to fit in some of this work
possibly
so we do roadside mowing yes that a
mower like lawn mower we don't do a lot
of finish mowing and frankly what we pay
for per year for that stuff is cheap
enough that I wouldn't want it would
cost us more and labor cost to have
Public Works do it than to sub that out
um okay you know because that's again I
know my area of expertise this isn't it
if you that's all I want to say I mean
because I get it from the taxpayers like
like Bill just said like thank you right
it's the bigger big mower you know you
just get a big roadside mower right
right that we need not a lawnmower yep
right but I mean we could get a town
lawn mower we buy huge pieces of
equipment so true yeah you know we we
just go for the big stuff here so I mean
I was I was just kind of weighing that
Eric makes a good point though landscape
you know we'd end up paying you know
Union Municipal rates to to get somebody
to do it so yeah that's no yeah and we
don't most towns have a parks department
we don't so I mean essentially a lot of
the parks related stuff we just sub
straight out to Hein parks and W we're
more of a road crew and do y no thank
you yep enough said with that I get it
thanks for the explanation
uh other questions
there move on to Street lighting which
is uh slightly reduced based on six
months of
data uh any rate increase obviously
we've heard a little bit about
electrical rate
increases seems reasonable if nobody has
any questions move on to the
custodian um so this is down a little
bit so the uh I assume it's based pretty
much on the actual yeah okay okay so
includes Community Center town hall and
Library based on current actual cost so
we're reduced a little bit from last
year's
budget any questions on that
no is that for fewer hours because
they're working fewer hours
or yeah so when we added the community
center we really didn't have a good feel
for how many hours on a weekly basis it
would take that to keep that building
clean um now we do have a pretty good
estimate so now we're just basing it off
of actual
hours um and we do use uh them for a lot
of side projects um office painting um
putting up all the the panels for sound
deadening Windows trim all that kind of
stuff too so it's all kind of built into
one budget um and that covers multiple
locations
you
okay I guess we'll go on to resident
trooper always a always a uh interesting
topic to discuss this is basically set
and I think I think this is pretty firm
right Eric based we know who's going to
be Trooper cook per Department of
Emergency Services estimate
25 so we know who our Trooper is going
to be we have an estimate
from uh the state based on his salary
and
indirects but again they don't that's
just the best guess they give us so
that's what I budget for it could very
easily be5 or
$10,000 more or less but that is exactly
what their budget estimate
is based on him and that's the entire
fee that we would pay him
not a there's no nothing else that's it
that includes his car and etc etc
correct that's salary and
indirects um so basically what myself
and a bunch of the smaller towns that
use resident state troopers went back
and argued with the
legislature that the state should go
back to because at one time towns paid
half the cost and then they eventually
shifted up to 100% And they really
jacked up the indirect cost so our costs
were very expensive and we went back to
the legislature and got the
legislature to to work with the state
police to lower the
indirects um and give us some credit for
the fact that even though he's our
resident state trooper he does get
called out to do other things
occasionally so that's where we're at
these days
okay how many hours would we expect to
see him around our
town so typically he works five eight
hour shifts per
week in our town Eric five eight hour
shifts per week yes
correct however those are somewhat
flexible right like you
can he it's not necessarily 9 to5 every
day right no and if we deliberately have
our resident trooper work some of all
three shifts so we work some first shift
some second shift some third shift and
it's on a
rotation so that uh you know nobody
knows exactly
when you know we don't tell anybody when
the trooper is on as kind of an
additional deterrent
thank
you any further
questions any of you were around a few
years ago when there was a discussion
about removing this from the line item
the the uh Town's people made their
wishes known very known quite clearly
yes that's that's not a rail I feel like
touching again nope I remember Robert's
description of it that's all I have to
remove the trooper right
we suggested it one year only because we
were having a real tough time with a
budget uh passing and it's one of the
single largest line items in the
townside budget so we said okay we could
go to Barracks coverage you know if we
just can't pass a budget here's one way
to cut it and I think the vote on that
you know they was something like four to
one
against right right in a year in a year
where we were having a real big time
real big struggle passing a budget
oh I mean I've had people say things to
me this year about you know the resident
trooper and I say well if you're
concerned about it then you need to
write a letter and let us know or let
someone know yeah you know and if you
don't get a letter then you know it's
just talk what I would even happened was
we had a meeting about it like a public
you know meeting budget hear I hearing
and in the town hall there and uh you
know lots of people turned up to express
their support for keeping right and it
was very it was a very unpopular
position to be saying well we don't
really have a noticeably different crime
rate than surrounding towns or towns
comparable towns sorry that some of whom
have full-on police departments some of
whom have resid state troopers some of
which have just rely on Barracks
coverage and there was no correlation
but that's you know people had specific
reasons they liked having the trooper
and uh yeah that was not a popular uh
approach to budget so yeah so anybody
who ask you should probably give them
that background but it it's it's
certainly an option for anyone to come
to the town budget meeting and make a
motion to remove that line item from the
budget right that's that's how it would
get removed and then we would have to
vote on it
so I I wouldn't give much chance much of
it I wouldn't give much chance to you
know that would be the you know if you
could get enough like-minded people who
knows you know
right okay fire department Fire
Commission so it was a pretty big nut
here there is a a backup spreadsheet I
don't think it's in here is it or is
there a
tab no it's I don't separate right no
tab for that yeah yeah Joanne just said
her computer shut down she's trying to
get back on ah okay
thanks oh you have to admit
her tell them to admit
me I don't see it coming up do you see
it
her no
I don't see anybody to admit so
yeah yeah I don't see anybody to admit
and usually we get a popup that says
intermit this person and they they'll
show in the participants but I don't see
anything there
yeah Liz maybe you could have her
completely log off and log back on
again
um you mean shutting the zoom all the
way down and then opening it back up
yeah yeah yeah because otherwise you'll
have 14 Zoom meetings open at the same
time
[Music]
and it'll just get very
complicated Eric the references
reference
spreadsheet
um is that in the budget I don't see
that we we receive that via email
yeah hang on a sec I'll figure out where
it's at there's a 10year capital
plan with the fire department there's a
request for the SCBA
packs but I don't see a spreadsheet in
the unless it's in Department
budgets
yeah yeah it's in Department budgets 26
fire yeah I found it okay
there Joanne is all ad been her now yep
good welcome back
Joanne you're muted I don't know if you
can hear us thank you I am so sorry
thank you for waiting that was a
nightmare back don't worry okay we're
all we're all working together thank you
back all right I am going to uh change
my share to the fire department
budget just downloaded it um so the
requested amount is 167
350 which is
uh I don't know what they're doing here
that's not how you do that calculation
so this is the breakout so it looks like
they're mostly flat with last year's
budget uh reduction in vehicle
maintenance increase in equipment
maintenance
um so we have a net
increase
medications that's probably the radio
sets in that protective clothing 25k
office supplies
5K assum that's firefighting supplies
Asmat training cost
recovery you know what cost recovery
would be Eric off hand or anybody you
know know I'm pretty sure that's a fee
that's due to the talin Dispatch Center
but for what exactly I don't know for
some reason we get a bill and the fire
department gets a
bill okay
and then physicals are just the annual
physicals that f fighters have to
undergo we're asking for a $200 increase
is that am I is that right yeah so it
looks
like and verifying that with the last
year yeah the budget spreadsheet
reflects the
same and what are their actuals look
like for for now
I don't know that we their estimated
amount is 167 375 so about what they're
asking for for this budget for reference
in 2324 they spent about
153,000 and15 to so about about 12,000
less 14,000 less
anybody have any comments or questions
on this I think we need to probably ask
questions before we reduce it we're
certainly not going to increase it
right so 5,000 for office supplies or is
that yeah I don't know seems high to me
but I don't
know yeah it'd be interesting to find
out what that's uh what's that that's
for it could be all kinds of stuff in
there right yeah without knowing I I'm
not gonna
so this is kind of the Fire Commission
it's in a way they're kind of like the
Board of Education they're the they're
the first line of uh you know approval
for this type of thing so we could we
could always go back to them if anybody
has anything specific we could have them
come back and kind of explain these
numbers you know I think Wally had
offered to do that what is FF supplies
does anybody know that line 252 probably
firefighting firefighting supplies oh
firefighting supplies oh okay yeah yeah
it could be you know could be all kinds
of different things that they use just
consumables um could be you know stuff
that they use to clean and maintain the
vehicles although that may be an
equipment maintenance or V Commandments
but you I guess the only comment I have
and I support the fire department 100%
it just looks like all the numbers are
exact zeros like yeah you know what I'm
saying it's like there's no $3
3751 and you know it's like it's just oh
25,000 you've been in business as long
as I have
Bill and you know what it's like
it's the only reason you get things like
$1
17,352 is one of two reasons a you have
a quote or B you took last year's and
added 3.25% to it right so right right
right you
know okay reminds me of the real estate
adage where they would say people were
charging you know
$320,000 for their house if they' have
priced it at
332,000 you know 20 you know $258
they'd actually get the higher amount
because people thought oh they went and
calculated it so it must be must be the
precise me you know so I mean I get
exactly what you're saying you know but
it's ballpark but you know if their
actuals are in there um so I think that
would be helpful
okay did I miss any categories Mark was
there one above this no we were we were
all we just kind of waiting for you to
get back in
yeah so again if you looked at the
actuals the the actual for 2324 is
153,000
um the uh budget for last year was
16750 estimated expense for this year is
167 375 slightly above and they're just
basically rounding it
out request
yeah but you know I mean short of of
having like a financial report for them
showing their actuals and like where
it's going and really digging into that
um you know I think that we kind of left
to the what they've told us here yep
Joanne the only thing that c and I'm
glad you went back to this because so I
could refresh myself is like I know the
building maintenance I thought was a
20,000 and a 20 thou you know they kept
it
level how much maintenance goes into the
building every year but
again yeah yeah I mean it's if you're
maintaining a building it that's
a again it's like I don't know how much
it's used how much wear and tear so I
don't want to speak to things I'm not an
expert at but right do they do certain
things one year and then they don't have
to do it the next year so we can save
there yeah well and building main is may
even be things like custodial stuff
where they clean and polish the floors
you know the trash could be a lot of
things yeah because they don't have a as
as long of a list of uh specific
accounts yeah and Eric remind me is this
the pl is the fire department where
they're getting like the new cabinets
and all that stuff this
year uh the fire department did request
from CIP new cabinets and new
countertops correct yeah and I'm just
trying to put it I know it's not in here
no I I have to tour some of these
buildings as well nope thank
you and that that purchase would be in
this budget that we're working on right
now that would be in the capital or it'
be a separate capital in a fund right
yeah right that comes out of one of the
capital funds and that will probably get
done in what's in the building
maintenance Fund in because it in a
sense it doesn't matter whether you do
it this year next year the Mone money is
currently in the fund so okay that's
yeah
okay does anybody want to make a motion
to make any changes here or do we want
to uh leave it as is
and I'm
good okay and we can always come back if
we find something Animal
Control um so slight increase over last
year um so this is
uh as we've got noted here the N Cog
contract is a n Northeast Council of
governments or something or correct yeah
yeah so we've
got for the yeah
okay I'm not probably sure much we can
do about that that's shared uh
stuff Fire
Marshall um not much change here there's
the fire fire Marshall and Deputy
salaries uh with a 4%
increase anybody have any questions or
concerns
there okay move on senior citizens so we
have the resident services coordinator
small
increase almost nil uh senior lunches um
we've got a significant ific increase
$7,500 uh and the note here this is per
the board of selectman meeting on
February 3D uh they must have voted to
increase
this is that just going up because we're
servicing the seniors more in the
community center
now Eric I do you know off hand right
that would be a great question yeah they
had a big long powow about how much they
wanted to char Char the seniors and how
much they wanted to fund that
um you know and and that's essentially
what they decided to fund it at um and
Eric for information I I think I found
they charged the
seniors maybe I saw Louise at a meeting
and she told me but it's $10 a lunch I
think that the seniors already pay maybe
in the past they paid $5 a lunch um
right and then does this budget Supply
whatever's left to pay for the food I
mean I want our seniors to be treated
well I know they waited a long time for
a building and you know a lot of them
have you know thank goodness they're
getting to use it so I don't really
understand was it wholly was it woefully
underfunded and they were running out of
money so the answer is it depends it
depends how much you want to charge the
seniors I think the board of Selectmen
has said they don't want the seniors
charge more than five bucks for lunch
basically so that fee accomplishes that
and gets a uniform funding for the
seniors because I've heard at recent
lunches they charge 10 so now they kind
of want to Circle back to five and then
Supply the rest of the money for the
seniors that's correct okay I mean just
it was a big increase so that yep thank
you for the info yep can you describe
explain what the resident services
coordinator is
Eric sure the resident services
coordinator it's kind of a catchall term
for uh you know what let me just pull up
the job description for that cuz Frank
it's tired I'm still on my orc at time
so that's easier I know it's getting
late
yeah actually how about I just send you
the job description for that okay um B
basically that that person does a a
bunch of things one they handle all the
renters
rebates um they H the the state requires
all towns to have a point of contact
for
uh you know how to use the 211 system
how to manage the oil assistance program
all of those kinds of things um that
person also is our coordinator
for uh if we have a hoarding situation
she's kind of one of the leads on the
hoarding task force um it's just it's a
whole range of Social Services that the
town
provides um you know
residents right okay so so basically
that's the municipal agent right I guess
it's I I didn't recognize that um It's
All Coming Back to Me Now yes so so
that's this is one of those kind of
oddities in that in our Charter and I
don't think it's been CH ever been
changed the state mandated all towns to
have a municipal agent um yes and the
town when they
adopted made a change in an ordinance to
have a municipal
agent they uh specified that the agent
would be
unpaid yes yeah however it's fairly hard
to find a volunteer that's willing to
work in the town hall 10 hours a week
which is what the state said say is the
minimum Staffing level um for free so
we've always gotten around it by just
throwing that in as one of the duties in
a position that we call resident
services
coordinator so that's what we've been
doing Eric to follow up on it since
since it was brought up I know we we
were gonna maybe ask a couple things
later but since you talked on it I it
definitely is in the charter we have
discovered that it's supposed to be a
volunteer right do you want a
volunteer no no I mean I listen I my
husband already tells me that I I Could
Be A Millionaire for the amount of time
that I do volunteer for the town and
spend researching so I actually already
do so maybe I will but um and and not a
problem there as far as giving my
service to the town which I take really
seriously
um but that is a topic that we will
discuss and and we have a couple
thoughts on it but I'd rather not talk
about it in public so but Liz did ask
about it and I thought that was it's
always been under the senior citizens
tab too I know it's a stip in that a
person gets to do that thing so we'll
leave it at that for now unless Liz has
follow
up I'm good yeah anybody want to propose
any changes is here disc further
discussion okay I guess uh move on to uh
Andover senior
Transportation so small increase in
driver dispatch salary the 3%
Factor um some for commercial drivers
test vehicle main it's up quite a bit
that's based on the last 12 months it
looks like of uh
of
actual or dis select discuss increase by
35 ComEd rust proofing in vehicle wash
nobody RSE proves a car anymore
geez
no sorry editorial comment
there
um yeah so vehicle maintenance up quite
a bit so all right
125 yeah this is about one of the
Vehicles border selectum has been
talking about for the past couple of
Cycles that's in rough
shape no rust proofing is not going to
help and I'll tell you that keep it
washed maybe it helps but right that's
the that's the problem the washing yeah
it has been po maintenance poor
maintenance has
yeah in a nutshell in a nutshell in the
executive session if you want to discuss
vehicle watcher
I'm not sure I could take that and only
these these we do go to the meeting so
we do hear it so right
understood okay so we got a total I mean
significant amount most of it's driver's
salary that obviously vehicle
maintenance is is significant and
they're not getting any you know they're
they're difficult to maintain Vehicles
some of these I'm
sure um anybody have any suggestions
questions comments on
this
NOP all
right Eastern Highlands Health officer
so the Health District budget adopted in
January this is the final number it is
what it is this is a required uh
position uh amplify mental health the
regional agency provides services to
Andover mostly state funded 250 bucks
don't see an issue
there Social Services $1,000 this access
is the Social Service Agency it covers
Andover uh so it's a it's a like a
donation the request letters is kind of
what they're requesting uh yeah so so by
law we have to have a series of Social
Services agencies
um in this area the access agency
provides that for the town of
bover in no way can we really have our
own full-blown
agency um
90 90 something perc of their budget is
from the the state and federal
government they do ask for a little
donation from all the towns they serve
Okay so we've typically funded that yeah
yeah I remember that now okay
um if nobody has any questions on that
the ahm Youth Services we actually voted
on this in
February uh to approve that so that
takes us
down uh into these sections so I'm going
to make a suggestion here we've we've
plowed through a lot of this made some
changes marked things for future uh
consideration um we're getting fairly
close but we still have quite a bit to
to really run through here so we could
do one of two things we
could keep
going we could
adjourn um or we could go into executive
session uh Joan said she had a couple
things she wanted to mention in
executive
session so um I I'll speak to that Mark
I I agree I when we came to it if we
went through I was going to ask because
I don't want to Force PE you know when
it gets very late it's hard to get
people in and and it's been a long night
already so whatever people want to do um
I'm good with
whatever I wouldn't
mind
well the we could go into executive
session and I could just say the couple
things that I wanted to say and then we
could you know it's it's nothing that
requires anything have to be done
tonight or anything or I save it till
next week I could save it till next week
if everyone's getting exhausted you know
I'm fine five minutes or less I'd say
let's take care of it now that'd be my
opinion anyone else should we muted
oh that's
fine I I would say like five minutes or
less like it's getting late so if you
want right so I I mean it's so important
that I don't want to feel like it's I
mean l we into do you think this should
be a tonight thing should it be a weit
thing what do you think we should do I
just want everyone's opinion because I
do not everybody's here yeah Louise
wasn't able to be here tonight maybe it
would be good if she was able to be here
too yeah so so because this this
situation can wait let's let's adjourn
on thank you yeah let's adjourn on that
because I don't want to get everybody
with a tired head because I know what
that feels like too yeah thank you if it
goes longer than five minutes too I
don't you know yeah and I don't want to
have to rush it then I get all you know
so this is fine we can let's let's
definitely we'll put an executive
session on our meeting agenda for next
week Eric is Kate back yet or yeah she
should be back right she's supposed to
be back Monday I think oh I couldn't
remember when yeah I went and look
because I wasn't sure either but I think
she's back sure I'm good with that and
then whatever anybody else wants to do
with for tonight I know it's a lot I
make the
motion okay
Liz seconds any
discussion all those in favor say hi hi
hi hi oh Rob I thought you might oppose
it okay is it too late any opposed I
resemble that remark so I can't ask one
final thing can I ask Eric something
before he shuts off the I just wanted to
ask if we if we adjourned or whatever so
we'll get the the changes that we made
tonight we can get them reflected get
the health insurance update then we can
kind of see where we're at I know Eric
I'll I'll save I've been i' I've been
running the meeting so I've been one
making changes in the spreadsheet so I
will forward these to you Eric and you
you can make any other adjustments and
post it whenever you're done fair enough
okay and then if we could like pick some
kind of you know like orange or
something to really stand out where the
changes were made so that we know where
the change were made so we don't have to
Circle back and ask that that would be
awesome okay thanks all right so getting
back to our vote all those in favor of
German say I I hi any opposed any
extensions okay hearing none the meeting
is adjourned thank you very much
everybody we will uh see you next week
have a good night everyone night night